# The Basics

Getting started on as beastly a thing as a blog platform sounds daunting. And in reality, it is; if I had a different client, with different requirements and deadlines, or were this not specifically a blog about writing a blog platform, hosted on whatever lo-fi thing I have produced in the current step, I would be much less cavalier about the process.

But this is Metablog, so let&rsquo;s just see what we can do to make the client (me), and the customer (you?) happy.

### Current Objective

Write what you are currently reading using a leaner language than HTML (_ **spoiler** _: it&rsquo;s being written in Markdown, presently).

After doing some research, I have landed on <a aria-label="Showdown library homepage" href="showdownjs.com">Showdown</a> as the Markdown parser and HTML generator of choice (for now). Given that GitHub Pages doesn&rsquo;t provide a backend<sup>1</sup>, the options are to pre-compile and flatten content into HTML in a build process, or to force the client to do the heavy lifting of parsing these documents.

Well, dear reader, for now I am sad to say that by virtue of reading this, your CPU had burned some cycles that could have been used on other things, like Slack, Facebook, or whatever tab has that evil ad that keeps playing audio, and taunting you behind your sea of other tabs.

I weighed my decision thusly:  
If I decide to flatten to HTML, it&rsquo;s a more difficult translation back to Markdown, with few options to help in an automated way. That means that if I decide to get into theming, or I decide to change how the app works, even if I store several copies of several compiled outputs, I will have a lot of infrastructure to undo, in order to make forward progress again. There are no trade-secrets, nor is there insider information, or really, any data that should not be publicly accessible, so the sensitivity of raw data is also not a concern.

And that, dear reader, is why you are going to be parsing Markdown for now.

### Changes to Make

- add Showdown to the page
- use Fetch to load posts
- use Showdown to convert .md files into HTML
- display HTML on the page

#### Adding Showdown

This should be straightforward; grab the CDN link, put it in the HTML for the page.

```html
<head>
  <!-- ... -->
  <script
    src="https://cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/showdown/1.8.6/showdown.min.js"
    integrity="sha256-dwhppIrxD8qC6lNulndZgtIm4XBU9zoMd9OUoXzIDAE="
    crossorigin="anonymous"></script>
</head>
```

That was pretty easy. Next time, we&rsquo;ll get to step #&hellip; yeah, kidding. Mostly. We&rsquo;ll keep going.

#### Using Fetch to Load Posts

All I need to do here is use `window.fetch` to load posts. I am going to assume that you guys have `window.fetch`, and will polyfill it later... terrible of me, but I can&rsquo;t imagine my audience using an outdated browser, unless it was Netscape Navigator, or Lynx.

That said, I have hit my first conundrum. Already. Step #2 of what might be the most simple core feature.

Here it is:  
I need to load posts. _Which_ posts? I suppose I could just hard-code an assumption in, but that would mean that I would have to edit the HTML page every time I wanted to add a blog. That also means that I would need a human to be timing those edits to the HTML page, so that I can release against the clock. Alternatively, I suppose, I could write a GitHub API for submitting, reviewing and approving PRs for link-only changes to the HTML file, but that sounds like a very different blog series to me.

So it sounds to me like the right answer is a manifest of some sort. I need a way to keep a list of posts that are ready to go, and I need to keep that list out of the HTML, if I can&rsquo;t have it dynamically inserted on page-load. In the future, I might make this the job of a `ServiceWorker`, but that is a very, very far future, indeed.

So let&rsquo;s decide on a format for the file, then, and also decide on where to find these Markdown files, so that I can save the post that I am writing, right now.

**article.manifest.txt**

```csv
2018-07-02.introduction.md
2018-07-03.the-basics.md
```

That seems like a sufficient format for now, given that it will be human-written in the immediate future, it looks like it will suit the needs of the app, until there is enough time to automate the generation of the filenames, folders, and/or manifest. Because it has timestamps, a basic gate could be included that allows loading of only blogs which are after that date, at UTC+0. A little hacky, for sure, but if that is enough for now, then the earliest somebody is going to get that new post is the time between the update of that list being published, and when the clock strikes midnight near London.

Most people would never notice such things, would they? How ever could you tell that an application was making such a loose and leaky decision with its data-governance? Good thing nobody will ever find out.

Okay, so with that decision + concession in hand, I have created an `/articles` folder, where I will store these articles, and I have created an `article.manifest.txt` file, which I will load from the page and parse. I will do the fuzzy date magic later, as it is not a priority for this feature, **but** I have come up with a solution that will allow me to implement it without having to tear out a lot of tangled pieces of code.

So let&rsquo;s get to some writing.

**blog-services.js**

```javascript
const loadBlogs = (parseArticle, { manifestUrl, articleBaseUrl }) => {
  // Fetch<manifestUrl> -> Promise<articleUrl[]>
  const loadManifest = defineLoader(loadText, parseManifest);
  // Fetch<articleUrl> -> Promise<parsedArticle>
  const loadArticle = defineLoader(loadText, parseArticle);

  // manifestUrl -> Promise<parsedArticle[]>
  return (
    loadManifest(manifestUrl)
      // when I need to filter by date/time, I can replace this comment with a filter
      .then(urls =>
        Promise.all(urls.map(url => loadArticle(`${articleBaseUrl}/${url}`)))
      )
  );
};

const request = (resolve, defaultOptions) => (url, options) =>
  fetch(url, options || defaultOptions).then(
    res => (res.ok ? Promise.resolve(resolve(res)) : Promise.reject(res))
  );

// Fetch -> Promise<text>
const loadText = request(res => res.text());

// (load<url, options> parse<output>) -> Fetch -> Promise<parsedOutput>
const defineLoader = (load, parse) => (url, options) =>
  load(url, options).then(parse);

// string -> string[]
const parseManifest = text => text.split("\n");
```

So that ought to just work. There&rsquo;s not much to it. I use this `request` and `defineLoader` pattern in a lot of places; not necessarily called `defineLoader`, but the behaviour is the same. If partial application is new to you, I might suggest watching the [FunFunFunction](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL0zVEGEvSaeEd9hlmCXrk5yUyqUag-n84) playlist on FP; specifically, the episodes on Higher-Order functions, Closures, and Currying. If you prefer something more in-depth, Kyle Simpson&rsquo;s [Functional-Light JavaScript](https://github.com/getify/Functional-Light-JS) is a great place to dive in. The types I am using here are a terrible portmanteau of different type systems; in general, I would be using something like TypeScript, but this will do, for now.

Note that this code has no idea what `markdown` is, or what a `Showdown` is. It just demands that when I call `loadBlogs`, I pass it the URLs that it needs, as well as a function that counts as a parser for each blog. This is so that in the future, when changes in requirements happen, I can make those changes at an appropriately removed level, and be done. There is still some cleaning, if I wanted to make it more generic, but the goal right now is to make it resistent to the URLs changing, and to the behaviour of Markdown parsing. Those are the bigger wins.

So now how do we get it on the page?
Well, I think for now we will just make another JS file, and use the services from there.

```js
const initialize = root => {
  const converter = new showdown.Converter();
  const wrapInBlogPostElement = wrapInnerHTML(
    makeElement("article", { class: "blog-post" })
  );

  // md -> htmlText -> <article><...blog ...></article>
  const convertBlog = compose(
    wrapInBlogPostElement,
    md => converter.makeHtml(md)
  );

  loadBlogs(convertBlog, {
    manifestUrl: "./article.manifest.txt",
    articleBaseUrl: "./articles"
  })
    .then(appendToFragmentInReverse())
    .then(frag => appendChild(root, frag))
    .catch(err => alert(err.message));
};

// I am cheating here, because they should be in reverse-chronological order
// there are better solutions than this particular assumption
const appendToFragmentInReverse = (
  frag = document.createDocumentFragment()
) => children => children.reduceRight(appendChildAndHR, frag);

// this is pretty gross, in terms of styling via HR
// but we can devote some time to prettifying, once the app is running
const appendChildAndHR = (el, child) => {
  return appendChild(el, child) && appendChild(el, makeElement("hr"));
};

const makeElement = (type, attributes = {}, children = []) => {
  const el = document.createElement(type);
  Object.keys(attributes)
    .map(key => [key, attributes[key]])
    .forEach(([key, value]) => el.setAttribute(key, value));

  return children.reduce(appendChild, el);
};

const appendChild = (el, child) => {
  el.appendChild(child);
  return el;
};

const wrapInnerHTML = node => innerHTML => {
  const el = node.cloneNode(false);
  el.innerHTML = innerHTML;
  return el;
};

// (a => b)[] array of functions from some type to another -> a -> b
// instead of h(g(f(x)))
// compose(h, g, f)(x)
const compose = (...fs) => fs.reduce((g, f) => x => g(f(x)), x => x);
// (a => b) -> a[] -> b[]
const map = transform => array => array.map(transform);
```

A couple of things of note, here:

- this view layer _sucks_. But we already know that it sucks; the view is something that we will want to come back to several times, I am sure.
- the throwaway `makeElement` here is almost exactly what `React.createElement` is, but for real elements, instead of React ones, and minus a lot of edge-cases for attributes. Just squint really hard, they are mostly the same.
- the configuration is sort of baked into the init function there; that is sub-optimal, and we will need to rectify it
- the architect in me is frustrated that I am literally writing the code, the article, and validating that the app runs all at the same time, without much pre-thought given. For some of this stuff I have been writing the code in this file, and then porting it over to the app, itself. It means that I am not making the best decisions I could, but it wouldn&rsquo;t be quite fair if you weren&rsquo;t coming along for a large portion of the ride.

Regardless, let&rsquo;s plug all of these things together, and see if they do what they say they do.
Here is my HTML; if you look back at my decision about the manifest format, you can probably guess that I intended to rip out the prior message and save it in a markdown file<sup>2</sup>.

```html
<!doctype html>

<html lang="en">

<head>
  <meta charset="utf-8">
  <title>Metablog: blogging about writing blogging software to host blogs about building blogging software...</title>
  <meta http-equiv="X-UA-Compatible" content="IE=edge">
  <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1">
</head>

<body>
  <h1>Metablog</h1>
  <div>A blog about writing a blog-site, as hosted by the site being written.</div>
  <hr>
  <section id="blogs"></section>
  <script defer
    src="https://cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/showdown/1.8.6/showdown.min.js"
    integrity="sha256-dwhppIrxD8qC6lNulndZgtIm4XBU9zoMd9OUoXzIDAE="
    crossorigin="anonymous"></script>
  <script defer src="./blog-services.js"></script>
  <script defer src="./blogs.js"></script>
  <script>
    window.addEventListener("load", () => {
      initialize(document.querySelector("#blogs"));
    });
  </script>
</body>

</html>
```

And with that, the whole thing works!  
This is an atrociously bad view, and is missing a lot of features, but it is almost good enough for now.  
Almost. Given the volume and importance of code here, it would be nice to have the ability to read it. So I am going to take the few minutes to get a code highlighter in, now that the code is relatively nicely set up for it.

**index.html**

```html
<head>
  <!-- ... -->
  <link
    rel="stylesheet"
    href="//cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/highlight.js/9.12.0/styles/atom-one-dark.min.css">
  <script defer
    src="//cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/highlight.js/9.12.0/highlight.min.js"
  ></script>
</head>
```

With those imports from [HighlightJS](https://highlightjs.org) in place, getting code-highlighting working is a few lines of code.

**blogs.js**

```js
const initialize = // ...
  
  // md -> htmlText -> <article><...blog ...></article>
  const convertBlog = compose(
    highlightCodeBlocks, // <-- adding one more step to "transformed" Markdown
    wrapInBlogPostElement,
    md => converter.makeHtml(md)
  );
  // ...
};

const highlightCodeBlocks = (root) => {
  root.querySelectorAll("pre code").forEach(el => hljs.highlightBlock(el));
  return root;
};

// ...
```

And done!
You now have a blog post that outlines how the app that is built that runs the blog that you are reading...

The app itself is far from complete (just look at it), but I would say that is pretty good progress for the day, and writing this post is already far less painful.

<small>1. other than Jekyll, but if the client were that easily pleased this series wouldn&rsquo;t exist.<br>2. thankfully, HTML is valid Markdown, so no conversion is necessary;</small>
